Local bp tutorial (#92)
gardener/landscaper: docs/tutorials/02-local-simple-blueprint.md

  resources: []
```

The basic component ist defined, so now the artifacts that are needed for the deployment (helm chart and blueprints) are added to the component descriptor and uploaded to the oci registry.

### Step 2: Add helm chart as local resource to the component descriptor

Local resources can be added to the component descriptor by using the `component-cli`.
See the [component-cli](https://github.com/gardener/component-cli) docs for more information.

Now the previously downloaded nginx ingress helm chart of the first tutorial is used.
Expand the following details section for the download instructions. (Also the example chart in the resources folder can be used)
<details>

```
helm repo add ingress-nginx https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx
helm repo add stable https://charts.helm.sh/stable
helm repo update

# download the nginx ingress helm chart and extract it to /tmp/chart/nginx-ingress
helm pull ingress-nginx/ingress-nginx --untar --destination /tmp/chart
```

</details>

The helm chart is now downloaded and stored on the machine.
Then the resource that should be added to component descriptor has to be defined in a `helm-resource.yaml` configuration file.

> This configuration file contains a resource definition with the input to the previously created helm chart.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration file contains a resource definition which takes the previously created helm char as `input`.<br>
```

```yaml
---
type: helm
name: ingress-nginx-chart
version: v0.1.0
relation: external
input:
  type: "dir"
  path: /tmp/chart # path to the downloaded helm chart
...
```

Add the resource to the component descriptor with the component-cli:
```
component-cli ca resources ./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx \
  -f ./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx/helm-resource.yaml
```
:warning: Note that the directory `./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx` _MUST_ contain the component descriptor at `./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx/component-descriptor.yaml`.

See the details for some more information about the component descriptor and the created format.
<details>
This command creates a component descriptor in CTF ([Common Transport Format](https://gardener.github.io/component-spec/oci.html#cnudie-transport-format)) which is the common format that is used to describe component-descriptors and their local artifacts.
A CTF is of the following form
```yaml
├── component-descriptor.yaml
├── blobs
│   ├── sha256:someblob
│   ├── sha256:someotherblob
```

</details>

> With the command above, the helm resource defined in the `helm-resource.yaml` has been added to the component descriptor as `localOCIBlob` and the defined input files/directories are packaged and copied to the blobs directory, which contains now 1 file.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the command above, the helm resource defined in the `helm-resource.yaml` has been added to the component descriptor as `localFilesystemBlob` and the defined input files/directories are packaged and copied to the blobs directory, which contains now 1 file.<br>
```

```yaml
meta:
  schemaVersion: v2
component:
  name: github.com/gardener/landscaper/local/ingress-nginx
  version: v0.1.0
  provider: internal
  repositoryContexts:
  - baseUrl: eu.gcr.io/gardener-project/landscaper/tutorials/components
    type: ociRegistry
  componentReferences: []
  sources: []
  resources:
  - access:
      filename: sha256:a489ebe19c3670a921c3e098526baf09b44bd1bf02424e9eb52f192efc1a4760
      mediaType: application/gzip
      type: localFilesystemBlob
    name: ingress-nginx-chart
    relation: external
    type: helm
    version: v0.1.0
```

### Step 3: Create the Blueprint and add it as local artifact

> The artifact that should be deployed is now added to the component descriptor and can be consumed by the blueprint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The artifact that should be deployed is now part of the component descriptor and can be consumed by the blueprint.
```

```
apiVersion: landscaper.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Blueprint

# ...

deployExecutions:
- name: default
  type: GoTemplate
  template: |
    deployItems:
    - name: deploy
      type: landscaper.gardener.cloud/helm
      # ...
      config:
        apiVersion: helm.deployer.landscaper.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
        kind: ProviderConfiguration

        chart:
          fromResource: # will fetch the helm chart from component descriptor resource of type helm chart
    {{ toYaml .componentDescriptorDef | indent 8 }}
            resourceName: ingress-nginx-chart

# ...
```

When the blueprint has been created it is also defined as resource in a `blueprint-resource.yaml` configuration file.
This configuration file contains the resource definition with the input to the previously created blueprint.<br>
```yaml
---
type: blueprint
name: ingress-nginx-blueprint
version: v0.1.0
relation: local
input:
  type: "dir"
  path: ./blueprint
...
```

```
component-cli ca resources ./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx \
  -f ./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx/blueprint-resource.yaml
```

> The blueprint has now been added to the component descriptor as `localOCIBlob` and the content has been packaged and copied to the blobs directory, which contains now 2 files.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With his, the blueprint has been added to the component descriptor as `localFilesystemBlob` and the content has been packaged and copied to the blobs directory, which contains now 2 files.<br>
```

# Develop a simple Blueprint with local artifacts

In the first tutorial a nginx helm chart has been deployed using a blueprint and a helm chart that are uploaded as separate artifacts to the remote repository.

> But with the component-descriptor it is also possible to have local artifacts which means that the blueprint and the helm chart and the component-descriptor are stored as one artifact. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But with the component-descriptor it is also possible to have local artifacts which means that the blueprint, the helm chart and the component-descriptor are stored as one artifact. 
```

This simplifies the build and transport of the component as only one artifact has to be maintained.

> This tutorial uses the same resources as created in the first tutorial but now the artifacts are completely self-contained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses the same resources as created in the [first tutorial](https://github.com/gardener/landscaper/blob/master/docs/tutorials/01-create-simple-blueprint.md) but now the artifacts are completely self-contained.
```

For more information about the component descriptor and the usage of the different fields see the [component descriptor docs](https://github.com/gardener/component-spec).

```yaml
meta:
  schemaVersion: v2

component:
  name: github.com/gardener/landscaper/nginx-ingress
  version: v0.2.0

  provider: internal
  sources: []
  componentReferences: []
  resources: []
```

#### Add local resources to the component descriptor

The basic component ist defined, so now the artifacts that are needed for the deployment (helm chart and blueprints) are added to the component descriptor and uploaded to the oci registry.

Local resources can be added to the component descriptor by using the `component-cli`.

First the resources are defined in a `resources.yaml` configuration file.
This configuration file contains 2 resource definition with the input to the previously created helm chart and blueprint.<br>
:warning: Note that the paths used in this configuration file are relative to the location of the `resource.yaml`-file.
```yaml
---
type: blueprint
name: ingress-nginx-blueprint
version: v0.1.0
relation: local
input:
  type: "dir"
  path: ./blueprint

> ...

Reviewer: what would be the meaning / intention of those `...`? Is there something else to put in here?

Author: they are part of the yaml spec and are the beginning `---` and end `...` characters for multi document yaml.
Most times people only use `---` but from the spec it should be `--- <some text> ...`.
See `9.2` fom the yaml spec https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2800132

Maybe I can link that spec

Reviewer: Linking the spec would be helpful. If you aren't aware of it, it just reads as if the snippet has been shortened.

---
type: helm
name: ingress-nginx-chart
version: v0.1.0
relation: external
input:
  type: "dir"
  path: ./chart
...
```

```

> component-cli ca resources ./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx \

Reviewer: `./docs/tutorials/resources/local-ingress-nginx` would have to contain the component descriptor, right? If so, it would be helpful to mention this in the description below.

  provider: internal
  repositoryContexts:
  - baseUrl: eu.gcr.io/gardener-project/landscaper/tutorials/components
    type: ociRegistry
  sources: []
  componentReferences: []
  resources:
  - access:
      digest: sha256:5c93619f745ff4b5352cd10957f6da7effd76ddfc2c4f612619080c09bcb2d49
      type: localOciBlob
    name: ingress-nginx-blueprint
    relation: local
    type: blueprint
    version: v0.1.0
  - access:
      digest: sha256:a489ebe19c3670a921c3e098526baf09b44bd1bf02424e9eb52f192efc1a4760
      type: localOciBlob
    name: ingress-nginx-chart
    relation: external
    type: helm
    version: v0.1.0
```

### Installation

As all external resources are defined and uploaded, the nginx ingress can be installed into the second kubernetes cluster.

Before the runtime resources are defined, the landscaper controller has to be installed into the first kubernetes cluster.
For a detailed installation instructions see [Landscaper Controller Installation](../gettingstarted/install-landscaper-controller.md).

The previously created blueprint can be installed in a target system by instructing the landscaper via a Installation resource to install it to the second cluster.

> The blueprint defines one import of a kubernetes, therefore, a `Target` resource of type `landscaper.gardener.cloud/kubernetes-cluster` that points to the second cluster has to be defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The blueprint defines one import of Kubernetes cluster credentials, therefore, a `Target` resource of type `landscaper.gardener.cloud/kubernetes-cluster` that points to the second cluster has to be defined.
```

        type: ociRegistry
        baseUrl: eu.gcr.io/gardener-project/landscaper/tutorials/components
      componentName: github.com/gardener/landscaper/ingress-nginx
      version: v0.2.0
```

__imports__:
The blueprint needs a target import of type kubernetes cluster.
The target `mycluster` is created as mentioned above and has to be connected to the import.
This is done by specifying the target as targets import.

:warning: The "#" has to be used to reference the previously created target. Otherwise, the landscaper would try to import the target from another component's export.
```yaml
imports:
  targets:
  - name: cluster
    # the "#" forces the landscaper to use the target with the name "my-cluster" in the same namespace
    target: "#my-cluster"
```

__exports__:

The nginx ingress blueprint export the used ingressClass so that it can be reused by other components.
To give the generic ingress class more semantic meaning in the current installation, the export is exported as `myIngressClass`.
Other installation are now able to consume the data with this specific name.

:warning: Note that this name has to be unique so that it will not be overwritten by other installations.

> The export is a data object export, therefore the eyport is defined under `spec.exports.data` and is written to the `dataRef: myIngressClass`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The export is a data object export, therefore the export is defined under `spec.exports.data` and is written to the `dataRef: myIngressClass`.
```

      componentName: github.com/gardener/landscaper/ingress-nginx
      version: v0.2.0
      resourceName: ingress-nginx-blueprint

  imports:
    targets:
    - name: cluster
      # the "#" forces the landscaper to use the target with the name "my-cluster" in the same namespace
      target: "#my-cluster"
  
  exports:
    data:
    - name: ingressClass
      dataRef: "myIngressClass"
```

When the `Target` and the Installation CRs are properly configured, they can be applied to the kubernetes cluster running the landscaper.

```shell script
kubectl create -f docs/tutorials/resources/ingress-nginx/my-target.yaml
kubectl create -f docs/tutorials/resources/ingress-nginx/installation.yaml
```

The landscaper will then immediately start to reconcile the installation as all imports are satisfied.

The first resources that will be created is the execution object which is a helper resource that contains the rendered deployitems.
The status shows the one specified Helm deploy item which has been automatically created by the landscaper.
```shell script
$ kubectl get inst
NAME                        PHASE       CONFIGGEN   EXECUTION                   AGE

> my-ingress                  Succeeded               my-ingress                  4m11s

Reviewer: does the `installation` move to phase `succeeded` as soon as the `execution` has been created?

Author: if everything is correct everything should succeed in seconds. But I will update it to be progressing which seems more redable in the tutorial.

Contextified dataobjects name is a hash of the exported key and the context, so that they can be unqiely identified by the landscaper.
:warning: Note: also targets are contextified but global target/dataobjects can be referenced with a prefix `#` as in the current target import.

```shell script
$ kubectl get do -l data.landscaper.gardener.cloud/key=myIngressClass
NAME                               CONTEXT   KEY
dole6tby5kerlxruq2n2efxiql6onp3h             myIngressClass

$ kubectl get do -l data.landscaper.gardener.cloud/key=myIngressClass -oyaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: List
items:
- apiVersion: landscaper.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
  kind: DataObject
  metadata:
    creationTimestamp: "2020-10-12T10:11:01Z"
    generation: 1
    labels:
      data.landscaper.gardener.cloud/key: myIngressClass
      data.landscaper.gardener.cloud/source: Installation.default.my-ingress
      data.landscaper.gardener.cloud/sourceType: export
    name: dole6tby5kerlxruq2n2efxiql6onp3h
    namespace: default
  data: nginx
```

### Summary
- A blueprint has been created that describes how a nginx ingress can be deployed into a kubernetes cluster.

> - A component descriptor has been created that contains the blueprint and another external resources as resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A component descriptor has been created that contains the blueprint and another external resources as resources with access type `localOciBlob`.
```
